## Everything as code

When we write things down, and use version control, we can evolve these things forever. If we couple automation with this, then we have a repeatable, reliable and safe way to project what we write into reality. Obviously we write software applications and services as code, which allows us to evolve them continuously. By extrapolating this concept to everything else (infrastructure, builds, pipelines, tests, configuration, service orchestration, security and policy), we can evolve these things as well.

Knowledge is then captured and does not only live in our heads. Suppose a human opens a user interface (say the Azure portal), and makes some changes. The changes (and the reasons for them) are not captured, and cannot be repeated in an automated way, and cannot form the basis of an evolution. They cannot easily be peer reviewed or discussed in the team. There is no easily accessible permanent record of the change. And no guarantee that the same change has been made in other places where it may be appropriate. In a month's time, the change and the reason for it may be completely lost. By capturing it as code this does not happen.

For example, Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is a way to capture the configuration of cloud infrastructure as code so that it can also evolve. For example we might use Terraform to describe our infrastructure and give us full automation. 

Immutable Infrastructure as Code enables automated, repeatable, reliable and fast infrastructure provisioning. All instances of infrastructure can be identical to the production environment. Since provisioning is automated, the infrastructure can be torn down and recreated within minutes. This lets us treat infrastructure as ephemeral, and allows us to update configuration by destroying and recreating, rather than modifying infrastructure in place, making it effectively immutable. Because no in-place modification is allowed, no human access to servers is required, which simplifies configuration and increases security significantly.
